.\" Manpage for go-rs (the `go` binary).
.\" Contact https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/go-rs to correct errors or omissions.
.TH GO 1 "2026-07-23" "go-rs 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
go \- Go on fusevm, a Go frontend lowered to bytecode and run on a Cranelift JIT (no go toolchain)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B go
[\fBrun\fR] \fIFILE.go\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]
.br
.B go
\fB\-\-lsp\fR | \fB\-\-dap\fR
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B go-rs
lexes and parses Go source (with Go's automatic semicolon insertion) and lowers
it to
.B fusevm
bytecode executed on a three\-tier Cranelift JIT \(em the same shared engine
behind
.BR zshrs ,
.BR stryke ,
.BR awkrs ,
vimlrs, elisprs, rubylang, javars, kotlinrs, and scalars. There is no bespoke VM
and no Go runtime; execution and codegen live in fusevm, with no goroutine
scheduler and no garbage collector.
.PP
The current slice runs a single\-file
.BR "package main" :
go\-rs executes the body of
.B func main
and lowers every other top\-level
.B func
to a fusevm subroutine (recursion supported). Statements cover
.BR ":=" " / " var
declarations, assignment and compound assignment, post\-increment/decrement,
.BR if / else ,
the three\-clause / condition / infinite
.BR for ,
and
.BR break / continue / return .
Printing is
.BR fmt.Println / Print / Printf
plus the builtins
.BR println / print .
Static
.BR int / float
typing makes
.B int / int
truncate toward zero; Go's
.B +
concatenates when either operand is a string.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B run \fIFILE.go\fR
Compile and run a Go program on fusevm. A bare \fIFILE.go\fR (no
.BR run )
is accepted as shorthand.
.TP
.B version
Print the version banner and exit.
.TP
.B help
Print usage and exit.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-version ", " \-version
Print the version banner and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help ", " \-help
Print usage and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-tokens
Print the lexer token stream (with inserted semicolons) for the file and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-ast
Print the parsed AST for the file and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-disasm
Print a fusevm bytecode disassembly listing for the file and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-lsp
Speak the Language Server Protocol over stdio (completion, hover, and
diagnostics from the same parser the runtime uses).
.TP
.B \-\-dap
Speak the Debug Adapter Protocol over stdio (breakpoints, single\-stepping, and
locals inspection).
.SH INLINE RUST FFI
A
.B rust { pub extern "C" fn ... }
block inside a function compiles to a cached
.B cdylib
on first run (via the shared fusevm FFI runtime); its exports become callable by
name from Go.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B 0
on success;
.B 1
on a lex, parse, compile, or runtime error (reported to stderr as
.BR "go-rs: <reason>" ).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR goall (1)
.br
Project: https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/go-rs
