.\" Companion overview manpage for go-rs.
.\" Contact https://github.com/MenkeTechnologies/go-rs to correct errors or omissions.
.TH GOALL 1 "2026-07-23" "go-rs 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
goall \- go-rs overview: architecture, language surface, and toolchain
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B go-rs
is a pure Go frontend for the
.B fusevm
bytecode VM. The pipeline is
.IR "lexer \(-> parser \(-> compiler \(-> fusevm::Chunk" ,
after which fusevm runs the chunk on its three\-tier Cranelift JIT. No component
interprets Go directly; there is no goroutine runtime and no garbage collector.
.SH ARCHITECTURE
.TP
.B lexer.rs
Hand\-written lexer implementing Go's automatic semicolon insertion (ASI).
.TP
.B parser.rs
Recursive\-descent parser building a Go AST.
.TP
.B compiler.rs
Lowers the AST to fusevm ops; tracks a static numeric type so
.B int / int
truncates while
.B float / float
stays exact, and dispatches string
.B +
and ordering through the fusevm numeric hook.
.TP
.B host.rs
The
.B fmt
print family and builtin
.BR println / print ,
plus the inline\-Rust FFI compile/call builtins.
.SH LANGUAGE SURFACE (SLICE 1)
Single\-file
.BR "package main" ;
top\-level
.B func
with parameters, results, and recursion;
.BR ":=" " / " var ;
assignment and compound assignment;
.BR if / else ;
three\-clause / condition / infinite
.BR for ;
.BR break / continue / return ;
arithmetic, comparisons, and short\-circuit
.BR "&&" " / " "||" ;
.BR fmt.Println / Print / Printf .
Structs, methods, interfaces, slices, maps, channels, and goroutines are future
waves.
.SH TOOLCHAIN
Standalone
.B go
binary;
.BR \-\-lsp " / " \-\-dap
servers over stdio; a
.B _go
zsh completion; this man page and
.BR go (1);
an HTML docs/report site with a generated
.BR reference.html ;
inline
.B rust {}
FFI; and
.BR \-\-dump\-tokens " / " \-\-dump\-ast " / " \-\-disasm
introspection.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR go (1)
